Naturally Liberating Whatever You Meet

Instructions to Guide You along the Profound Path

by Khenpo Gangshar Wangpo

With the devotion of self-awareness, I pay homage to the Guru Vajradhara.

This guidance for disciples who are fortunate enough to wish to practise the profound secrets
of the Vajrayāna, the very quintessence of the Highest Yoga tantras, the wisdom of the effortless
Atiyoga, has three parts: 1) the preliminary stages of training the mind, 2) the
main practice, the yoga of introduction, and 3) the profound concluding instructions on sustaining
the practice in which the key points are brought together.

I. The Preliminary Stages of Training the Mind

This has two parts: 1) the common preliminaries, and 2) the uncommon preliminaries that represent
the unique qualities of this particular path.

1. The Common Preliminaries

The instruction on the four thoughts that turn the mind is the means to prevent grasping at
the appearances of this life.[1]Taking refuge marks the difference between a genuine path
and an incorrect one.Generating the wish to awaken (bodhicitta) elevates you above inferior
paths;The meditation on Vajrasattva and recitation of his mantra purifies adverse conditions,
such as past negative actions and obscurations, that hamper the development of bodhicitta,
the heart of refuge.Maṇḍala offering is the branch that provides favourable conditions
through the accumulation of merit.And guru yoga is the root of blessings, the means by
which extraordinary experience and realization may dawn swiftly within your being.

2. The Uncommon Preliminaries that Represent the Unique Qualities of this Particular Path, the
Analytical Meditations of a Paṇḍita

It is an infallible principle that virtuous actions lead to comfort while negative actions bring
about suffering. Initially, therefore, it is essential to recognize what is virtuous
and what is negative. In order to do this, it is imperative that we identify the three doors
of body, speech and mind and determine which is the most important.

The body is material, the physical support for positive and negative actions.Speech is what
facilitates linguistic and verbal communication.And the mind is what thinks of everything
under the sun.[2] It is capable of displaying many moods, happy and sad, from one moment to
the next, and is the agent of attachment and aversion.

Having identified the three doors, ask yourself which is the most important when performing
any action, positive or negative. Is it body, speech or mind? Some will consider the body
to be most important, some the speech, and others the mind. If you feel that either body or
speech is the most important, your contemplation hasn’t really penetrated the issue. Of
the three, mind is most significant, for without its involvement physical actions, positive
or negative, and verbal communication would be impossible. Mind is dominant. As it is said:

Mind holds dominion over all, like a monarch.The body is but its servant in good and bad deeds.


As this suggests, mind is sovereign, while body and speech are merely subservient.

Consider, for example, when you get upset at an enemy. What is the principal source of your
anger? Is it your mind or the enemy? Similarly, when feeling affection for a loved one, is
the determining factor your mind or the person? You will discover that the enemy or loved
one may serve as support, but the related emotion originates from your mind. Therefore, the
mind is principal.

Once you have mastery over your mind, external conditions, such as enemies and loved ones, will
no longer be able to cause you harm or bring you benefit. However, without control over
your mind, no matter where you find yourself, you’ll be continually beset with difficulties
caused by the welling forth of attachment and aversion. It is imperative, therefore, to
understand that the mind is the source of all happiness and sorrow, good and bad, attachment
and aversion. As the Great Omniscient One[3] said:

While under the influence of datura,[4]No matter what appears to you,It is all mistaken, nothing
more than a hallucination.Similarly, understand that while under the influence of confusion,The
appearances of the six classes of beings are all mistaken,Nothing more than empty
forms, apparent yet nonexistent.[5]

And:

They appear to the mind and are designated by it,
So strive to tame the confused mind.[6]

It is just as he has written, but don’t simply believe what you read or what others tell you.
Recognize for yourself that mind is the source of everything, and recognize appearances
to be mind. In this, a distinction must be drawn between appearance and objective appearance.
Otherwise, as the Great Omniscient One has written:

The ignorant claim everything to be mind.They are bewildered as to the three types of appearance,Have
many faults, are confused and absurd –Give up such perverted ways![7]

The mere appearance of forms, sounds, and the like, the objects of the sensory consciousnesses,
are referred to as objective appearance. The attachment toward something pleasant, aversion
toward something unpleasant, and confusion toward everything else – the trio of conceptual
attachment, aversion and confusion – are simply appearances. It is imperative to understand
appearances to be the play of mind, whereas objective appearances, such as the mere
appearance of forms, sounds, and the like, only appear due to the power of the mind. They
are, however, not mind; they are the shared perceptions of beings, mutually dependent and
empty of true existence.

Where does the mind dwell? Investigate from the tips of the hairs on your head down to the ends
of your toenails and back again, considering the outer skin, inner bones and flesh in-between,
as well as the five vital[8] and six hollow organs.[9] Most Chinese people say that
the mind is located in the head, whereas most Tibetans say it abides in the heart. It’s
not at all clear, for when touching the head mind seems to be up there, but when touching
the soles of the feet it appears to be down there! It has no definite location. It doesn’t
dwell in an object outside the body, within the body, nor in any of the spaces in-between.
It is imperative to realize that the mind has no fixed location.

If the mind had such a location, would its outer, inner and intermediate parts be identical
with or separate from the abiding mind? If they were identical, the mind would need to transform,
increase, and decrease just as the outer world and physical body do, but this isn’t
the case.

If, on the other hand, they were entirely different, would this separate mind actually exist.
If it were existent, it would need to have a colour and shape. But since it has no perceptible
colour or shape, it is clearly not existent. Still, since this ever-conscious, all-cognizant
sovereign is unceasing, it cannot be entirely non-existent. As Karmapa Rangjung
Dorje wrote:

It is not existent, for even the Buddhas have not seen it;Nor is it nonexistent, for it is the
basis of all saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.This is not a contradiction; it’s the middle way of unity.May
I realize mind’s nature, free from limiting extremes.[10]

This concludes the unique preliminary practices of this path, the analytic meditations of a
paṇḍita.

II. The Main Practice, the Yoga of Introduction

The main part of the practice, the yoga of introduction, comprises the resting meditation of
a kusulu in two parts: 1) an instruction on resolving the nature of the body, speech and
mind, and 2) an instruction on discerning between ordinary mind and awareness

1. Instruction on Resolving the Nature of the Body, Speech and Mind

Sit with your body straight. Don’t talk or make sounds. Keep your mouth slightly open, and allow
your breathing to settle. Don’t dwell in the past or anticipate the future; simply settle
naturally into the ordinary mind of the immediate moment without any attempt to alter
or correct it. Remain in this state of mind-as-such, which is, in and of itself, nothing
whatsoever— clear, naked, sharp and vivid, utterly free of any deliberate contemplation or
recollection and any thought of comfort or discomfort. This is awareness.

At this time, there is no thought of objective forms, sounds, and so on existing ‘over there’;
rather, everything simply appears without obstruction. Similarly, there is no thought of
a subject, the six types of consciousness, existing within. Does this cease? Luminous, non-conceptual,
naked awareness is beyond cessation.

While you experience this, let your body be naturally loose and comfortable. This is the body
of all the victorious ones, the essence of creation-phase yoga.

Speech should be natural and unrestrained. You should freely express whatever comes to mind
directly, without holding anything back. You will not be able to find the root of sound, for
all sound is beyond arising, audible yet empty. This is the speech of all the Victorious
Ones, the essence of all recitation.

No matter what thoughts arise in the mind, be they good or bad, happy or sad, remain naturally
settled and at ease. Mind-as-such has no notions of happiness or sadness; it is a luminous
emptiness, naked and vivid. For all beings throughout the three realms, this is the nature
of their minds: the transcendent wisdom of all buddhas throughout the three times, the
essence of the eighty-four thousand gateways to the dharma, and the heart of the supreme
guide, the glorious guru.

It is the perfection of wisdom taught in the second turning of the dharma wheel; the buddha
nature taught in the final turning; the tantra of the ground, the natural and spontaneously
present maṇḍala, according to the general presentation of mantrayāna, and, in highest tantra,
it is referred to as Guhyasamāja, Cakrasaṃvara, Kālacakra and so on. According to the
threefold inner division of tantra: in Mahāyoga, it is the union of the two truths, the
exalted and great dharmakāya; in Anuyoga, the great bliss of the child, the root maṇḍala of
bodhicitta; and finally, in Atiyoga, it is referred to as the Great Perfection of awareness
and emptiness. These names simply point to the same thing, the nature of the mind. The
Geluk tradition also adheres to this point, as the Great Master (Tsongkhapa) wrote:

The knowledge that appearances arise unfailingly in dependenceAnd the knowledge that they are
empty and beyond all assertions—As long as these two appear to you as separate,There can
be no realization of the Buddha’s wisdom. Yet when they arise at once, not each in turn but
both together,Then through merely seeing unfailing dependent origination,Certainty is born,
and all modes of misapprehension fall apart—That is when discernment of the view has
reached perfection.[11]

The Lord of the Dharma, Drakpa Gyaltsen wrote:

If there is grasping, it is not the view.[12]

Sakyapa masters consider their view of the Indivisibility of Saṃsāra and Nirvāṇa to be freedom
from grasping. Among the incomparable Kagyüpas, too, glorious Rangjung Dorje wrote:

According to the wise, all is neither true nor false,Like the moon’s reflection in water.The
ordinary mind itself is the dharmadhātu,Which is called "essence of the victorious".[13]


Thus, the luminous Mahāmudrā is also free of grasping.

On this point, it is said all the learned and accomplished masters of India and Tibet are of
a single mind. There is no one in the Sakya, Geluk, Kagyü or Nyingma schools who fails to
agree that the exalted wisdom of the main practice is beyond grasping. You must understand
this point for yourself and communicate it accordingly to others.

This has been the introduction to the nature of body, speech and mind as the enlightened body,
speech and mind of the buddhas, which accords with the verses from the great master of
Uḍḍiyāna that begin, "Do this towards all you see…"[14]

2. Instruction on Discerning between Ordinary Mind and Awareness

It is imperative to discern between mind and awareness. The Great Omniscient One wrote:

These days, the oxen who consider themselves followers of AtiClaim that discursive thought is
awakened mind.Such fools are lost in the realm of darkness,Far from the meaning of the Natural
Great Perfection.[15]

If you fail to discern between ordinary mind and awareness, you will develop erroneous views
concerning cause and effect and so on, as you stray from the correct path on which conduct
and view are in harmony. While abiding within the naturally settled and undistracted state,
awareness is without fixation like the sky, and no matter what your circumstances, be
they good or bad, there is not the slightest benefit or harm from hope and fear, joy and sorrow.
However, should you become distracted, even slightly, when the conditions mentioned
above are met, thoughts of desiring happiness and avoiding sadness will occur, and action
(karma) will accumulate – this is the ordinary mind. The metaphor of clouds in the sky will
serve us well: awareness needs to be stable like a perfectly clear sky, and the aspects
of mind must be dispersible, like clouds within the sky. Through this, you will be able to
discern between awareness and the ordinary mind.

III. The Profound Concluding Instructions on Sustaining the Practice in Which the Key Points
Are Brought Together

The third section explains the profound instructions of subsequent application, based upon the
pith instructions that directly reveal natural liberation.

Whilst remaining in the naturally settled, undistracted state, it is impossible to accumulate
karma, and the streams of future karma are therefore severed. You must understand that although
you cannot experience the results of karma that you have not accumulated, this does
not mean that you will not experience the effects of previously amassed karma. It is crucial,
therefore, that you do not stray into the belief that all karma, positive and negative,
is simply empty. Unless all previously amassed karma is purified through confession, the
ripening of karmic effects is inevitable; in other words, it’s still possible to experience
the effects of karma.

The effects of karma will only ripen in your body or mind, for it is impossible for them to
ripen elsewhere. You may fall sick if they mature in your body or suffer if they ripen in
your mind. This may, in turn, provoke the six disturbing emotions. At such times, it is imperative
that you apply the instructions for taking sickness, sorrow and disturbing emotions
onto the spiritual path. The essence of these instructions is simply to rest in the naturally
settled nature, and this alone is sufficient.

If you indulge the happiness that you feel when encountering pleasant circumstances or the sadness
that you feel upon encountering difficulties, you will amass immense karma. Therefore,
no matter what circumstances you meet, good or bad, you must initially recognize thoughts
of delight or discomfort the moment they arise. Having recognized your thoughts, do not
try to suppress or indulge them; instead, look into the thought itself, the one that feels
happy or sad. Settle naturally and remain within the nature of the thought. Then, as you
relax in mind-as-such, empty, luminous and naked, unencumbered by thoughts of happiness
or sadness, innate awareness will be revealed.

When you become physically sick, don’t indulge the illness; instead, settle naturally and remain
within the feeling of being ill. The sickness may not abate, but you will directly realize
the naked, innate nature of awareness, free from thoughts concerning what hurts, where
it hurts, how it hurts, and so on. At the same time, the pain and sickness will become
less intense and less substantial.

Moreover, possessing one destructive emotion means possessing them all. However, people are
different: some may have stronger anger, some greater miserliness, others confusion, desire,
jealousy, pride, and so on. This is why we have different buddha families.

The destructive emotion of anger is a feeling of discomfort that arises toward an object felt
to be unpleasant, leading to agitation and aggression.Miserliness is the inability to give
others the things that you find attractive due to fixation and stinginess.Confusion is
likened to darkness and is the root of everything negative. It is a fundamental distortion
of reality that arises through not seeing one’s own essence.Desire is an attraction toward
and wish to possess pleasant things, including sights and sounds. Carnal lust, in particular,
is the most potent form of desirous attachment.Jealousy is a rejection leading to a
disapproval of the qualities held by those of greater or equal status.Pride is to feel superior
to those perceived to be lower than oneself in spiritual or worldly terms.

These six disturbing emotions are the causes of the six types of being within saṃsāra. Predominant
anger, for example, leads to rebirth in the hells, and so on. It is imperative to recognize
these emotions the moment they arise and, without suppressing or indulging them,
settle naturally. As you remain within the nature of the emotion, natural liberation will
occur, bringing what we call mirror-like wisdom and the rest. It is just as we find in Ratna
Lingpa's Second Treasury:

The essence of an angry mind is clear awareness,Empty yet luminous the moment you recognize
it.This nature is called mirror-like wisdom.Fine maidens, let us rest within the natural state.
The essence of a confused mind is luminous, natural awareness,Wide awake the moment
you gaze into its face.This vital nature is called the wisdom of the dharmadhātu.Fine maidens,
let us rest within the natural state. The essence of a proud mind is the expression of
natural awareness,Naturally empty the moment you leave it in its place.This state is called
the wisdom of evenness.Fine maidens, let us rest within the natural state. The essence
of a desirous mind is lustful attachment,But sustained without clinging, it is empty bliss.This
nature is called the wisdom of discernment.Fine maidens, let us rest within the natural
state. The essence of a jealous mind is dualistic grasping,But when left in its own place,
it is nakedly free.This nature is called the all-accomplishing wisdom,Fine maidens,
let us rest within the natural state.[16]

Should you regard destructive emotions as flawed and seek to reject them, you might win their
temporarily suppression. But, as you will not have cut them at the root, their poisonous
residue will reemerge, as is the case for practitioners of worldly concentration (dhyāna).


If you meditate viewing the destructive emotions as empty, your path will not be one of taking
destructive emotions as the path. It will be taking emptiness as the path and therefore
not the short path that is a unique feature of the mantrayāna.

Treating the destructive emotions as if they had intrinsic characteristics and indulging them
is akin to eating a poisonous plant; like the copulation of ordinary people, it is a cause
for being bound to saṃsāra.

For this reason, just as a toxic plant from which the poison has been extracted may be taken
as medicine, the approach here is not to regard destructive emotions as flawed and suppress
them, or to believe they have qualities and indulge them, but simply to relax and settle
into the nature of whatever arises, so that it is revealed as wisdom there and then. That
is the unique feature of this instruction.

Should you wish to receive further direct guidance related to the path of means and so on, this
must be learnt in detail from the oral instructions of your guru.

Taking the Bardo as the Path

When you apply slight pressure to your eyes and ears with your fingers, colors, lights, and
sounds will naturally manifest. If you naturally settle and grow accustomed over a long time
to these empty forms, which don’t exist outside, inside, or anywhere in-between, then when
you eventually pass away, since the appearances of the bardo are none other than these
natural self-manifestations, you’ll recognize them as such and be liberated, just like recognizing
a prior acquaintance or a child rushing into its mother’s lap.

The pith instructions concerning the appearances of spontaneous presence, Tögal, are divided
into daytime practices and those performed in darkness. This instruction corresponds to the
instruction for training in darkness. There are also instructions for utilizing the rays
of the rising and setting sun in daytime, and moonlight or electric lights at night.

Taking Sleep as the Path

There is no need to make an effort to transform or project specific dream appearances. Sleep
in a state that is undistracted and naturally settled. When you experience periods of deep
sleep without the occurrence of dreams and the clarity of the natural state of mind is maintained
upon awakening, this is called the natural luminosity of sleep.

There may be times when you don’t sleep but simply remain quiet and still. On other occasions,
you might fall asleep and experience faint dreams that you cannot remember upon awakening;
this marks the beginning of the purification of dreams. For someone with great capacity
and diligence, [ordinary] dreams cease by being forgotten; for a person with intermediate
aptitude, they cease through recognition; and, for a person of the lowest capacity, they
cease by being replaced by good dreams. All the sūtras, tantras and śāstras agree that dreams
must ultimately be purified.

The stages of phowa, the transference of consciousness, should be learned from other sources.


The above instructions merely summarize the main points of practice.

I have extracted the bare essence of the profound instructionsFrom the deep wisdom of the victorious
ones and their children,The central guidance of the profound points of the new and
old tantras,And arranged it all concisely in a few words.

When subdual through vehicles involving effort proves difficult,The teachings based on effortless
mind will emerge, it is said.As this time is now upon us, should you engage with these
pointsThey hold a Dharma that is without error and easy to practice.

Seeing several reasons for such a composition,And urged on by several sublime individuals,I
have set aside poetics and flowery expressionsTo write this freely in a simple, pleasant style.


By this merit, may the infinity of sentient beingsBe victorious over the noxious breath of the
warring titans,[17]And may the brilliant sun of profound quintessential meaningHerald the
dawn of a new golden age of perfection.

Sarvadā kalyāṇaṁ bhavatu! (May all be auspicious!)

| © Shechen Translations, 2022. Translated by Shechen Gelong Tenzin Yeshe Jamchen (Sean Price)
based on explanations and clarifications from Kyabje Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, Radha Chime
Tulku Rinpoche, Kyabje Shechen Rabjam Rinpoche, Thrangu Khenpo Karma Gedun, Shechen Khenpo
Yeshe Gyaltsen and many others. Dedicated to the Radha Chime Rinpoche, a disciple of
Khenpo Gangshar, and Rinchen Dolma, who is devoted to the path that Khenpo Gangshar revealed.